Good morning, everybody.
Can you hear me?
Great.
My name is Tim Omernick,
and I'm an iPhone engineer at Apple.
So over the past year, almost,
we've been working really hard to
get the SDK ready for people to
start writing iPhone applications.
Now, obviously,
we're very excited about this,
but we've also taken this opportunity
to add some really exciting things
to Safari on iPhone 2.0 that you,
web developers,
take advantage of in your applications.
So I'm going to focus mostly on that,
but before I get started,
I wanted to talk about
web applications today.
There are over 1,700
iPhone web applications,
approaching 1,800.
There are more popping
up every single day.
These do a variety of
really awesome things.
I could talk about all of them,
but we'd be here for a while,
so I'm just going to highlight three
of them that I use very frequently.
First up,
here's a little version of Wikipedia.
Anybody who knows me knows that
I spend way too much time on Wikipedia,
so I really like this.
You notice it has a nice
big search field at the top.
It's really easy to get to.
Additionally,
the content area of this web app is
all fit to the width of the device,
and so the text is nice and legible.
It's very easy to navigate around
inside of Wikipedia using this.
This is the iCal train.
I live down closer to Apple,
so whenever I need to get to the city,
I can use this to look
up train schedules.
I just wanted to highlight
the shiny button,
sort of iPhone-style art.
Additionally,
it has the pinstripe background
and sort of the standard list look.
When you tap "View Schedule," it
slides over to a sectioned list,
much like you'd see in the
iPod app on the iPhone.
Everybody knows Google.
I'm sure you've all seen this.
I just wanted to highlight this because
I think they've done a great job of
taking all of their different web
apps and sort of condensing them down
into something that really fits well
and is really usable on the iPhone.
I think they've done
a great job with this.
So these are really cool apps.
Again, there are a whole bunch more.
A common thread with these applications
is that they look like iPhone apps.
People have gone to this extra effort
to make it seem like these apps are
real native iPhone applications.
They really feel at home on the iPhone.
So while these look
like real iPhone apps,
we think that they could be
made a little bit better,
of course.
They look like iPhone apps,
but they don't always
feel like iPhone apps,
and this is an important distinction.
Many of these web applications
suffer from what I like to
call delayed interaction.
Just to show an example of what this is,
here's the AOL television
listings web app,
which I think is actually one of the
better-looking web apps out there.
It looks like a real native application.
But the illusion starts to sort
of break down as soon as you start
interacting with the content here.
When you touch one of
the television shows,
instead of getting the nice
blue highlight like you're
used to in iPhone lists,
you get this gray highlight thing
and the bubble that pops up.
I'm sure you've all seen this thing.
So this is informative,
but not exactly what you would
expect or want in a web application.
Additionally,
a web application today cannot take
advantage of multitouch or gestures.
These are really important to
native iPhone applications.
Just to show an example here,
this is the Maps application.
It has the pinch gesture.
You can zoom in and out
using a two-finger pinch.
You can also zoom out quickly by
tapping with two fingers on the map.
So this is something that's just not
possible today in a web application,
and we're hoping to solve that.
So what are we going to talk about today?
We're going to go over
JavaScript touch and gesture events,
CSS visual effects,
which you can use in addition
to JavaScript touch and gesture
events to provide fluid,
responsive user interface feedback.
We're going to talk about how to store
user data within your web application,
and additionally,
we're going to go over some tips and
tricks that you can use to polish and
really add some shine to your iPhone app.
So let's get started with
JavaScript touch and gesture events.
You can think of this as
multi-touch for JavaScript.
So the first thing you get right out of
the box is more interactive controls.
Instead of this sort of delayed
interaction thing that you
see in iPhone web apps today,
you can respond directly
to the user's touches.
You can implement custom gestures.
We have identified a couple of common
ones that we think people are going
to use in all sorts of different
applications in a variety of ways.
So we've come up with gesture
events that sort of standardize two
gestures that we're very fond of.
But you can use the raw touch events to
implement whichever gestures you want.
So you can have some sort of a
two-fingered pinch while you're doing
a zigzag kind of thing or whatever.
Just use your imagination.
Drag and drop is something people
have been asking us for a lot,
and until today, it just has not been
possible on the iPhone.
So we're going to show
you how to do that.
Pretty much this is open-ended.
You can use this for whatever you want,
whether it's just simple touch
interaction or really advanced
multi-touch gestural input.
Now you can do the same sorts of things
that native iPhone applications can do.
So what's the big problem
with mouse events?
Why can't you do these sorts
of things with mouse events?
Why didn't we start with this existing
model and maybe extend that to support
a device that's based on a touchscreen?
Well, there are a lot of web applications
and web pages out there that were
written under the assumption that
the user is on a computer and has a
mouse and that there are scroll bars.
None of these assumptions
are valid on the iPhone.
So we have this sort of simulated event
model where when you're touching the
page and moving your finger around,
you're really just scrolling around.
And no events are really sent down into
the page until you tap and release.
And this works fine on the vast
majority of websites that are out there,
but it doesn't afford the
kind of flexibility that you
might want in an application.
Amen.
So for simplicity for web applications
that are designed from the get-go to work
well on a multi-touch-based platform,
we're introducing
JavaScript Touch and Gesture Events.
If you've done any sort of
programming with mouse events,
though,
you can sort of conceptually think
of this as a lot like mouse events,
but instead of having one
cursor with one point,
you've got a lot of cursors.
In actuality, they're fingers,
but they work pretty much the same.
So to show you a little demo of what's
possible with JavaScript touch events,
I'd like to invite my friend
and colleague Brad Moore on
stage for a little demo.
Brad?
Thanks, everyone.
I'm Brad.
I work with Tim on the iPhone
software engineering team.
So we've got some great
demos for you today,
but they've been distilled
down for simplicity's sake,
and I want to start out with
a slightly more intricate,
motivating example.
So here we have Apple's retail page,
but it's been enhanced with a fun feature
that works beautifully on the iPhone.
Let me show you that now.
This is, of course, a normal web page.
I can scroll around, zoom into images.
But if I zoom into this div,
I discover it's not just a static image.
It's rather an embedded VR scene.
And the cool thing about this
is it's not using QuickTime VR.
It's, in fact,
not using any plug-in at all.
It's using nothing but CSS transform,
JavaScript event handlers,
and HTML elements,
so all core web technologies with
which you're probably already familiar.
And it's just fun to use.
It's very responsive.
It's even hardware accelerated.
And it's this direct interaction that
makes iPhone apps so fun to use natively.
And now web apps can be
first-class citizens in terms
of the interactivity story.
So hopefully this whets your appetite,
and now Tim's gonna take
you through the details.
Thank you, Brad.
So that was just a little example,
pretty high level,
of what you can do with touch events.
So now I'd like to talk a
little bit about how they work.
So like I said before,
this is pretty similar to mouse events.
But each one of the user's
fingers you can sort of think
of as its own distinct mouse.
So each finger that comes in
contact with the screen will
generate a sequence of events.
And these events are:
when you touch the screen,
that will send a touch start event.
If you then move your
finger around on the page,
that will send a sequence of
touch-move events for every
time you move your finger.
And then when you lift your finger,
that will send a touch end event.
So just as an example,
a simple example of how
you might want to use this,
if you wanted to detect something
like a tap or just a double
tap with a single finger,
you could look for a touch
start followed by a touch end
with no touch moves in between.
Additionally,
there is a touch cancel event.
If you've been paying attention
to the UIKit sessions,
you might see some similarities
between this event model and
the touch event model in UIKit.
So we've got this touch cancel event,
which is sent by the system
in certain situations,
like when you're interacting with
web content and you get a phone
call or the user suspends Safari.
For the touch cancel event,
the difference between touch cancel and
touch end is you wouldn't necessarily
want to perform whatever action
your content was supposed to perform
on touch end on a touch cancel.
So to register for these events,
this works just like any other DOM event.
We have HTML event handlers,
onTouchStart, onTouchMove, onTouchEnd,
and onTouchCancel,
just four new handlers.
And these all take the
event as the first argument.
Of course, you can also do this
from JavaScript using
Element.AddEventListener.
So you've got an element that is
registered to receive touch events.
What do you do from there?
Well, this event isn't any normal event.
This is actually a touch event,
which has a few special properties
that you should know about.
If you want to process all of
the touches that are on the page,
regardless of what they're touching,
you can look at event.touches.
And this is really useful if you're
implementing your own custom gesture,
where if you don't really care about
where the user is touching on the page,
you just care about what the fingers
are doing in some relative fashion.
So you can get all the touches on
the page through event.touches.
If you just want to look at the
touches that are in the node or
element that's receiving this event,
you can get target touches.
This is really useful when you have
multiple things on the page that are
all independently tracking touch events,
so that you can easily
differentiate touches in one
element from touches in another.
Additionally,
you can get the set of changed touches,
which are just the touches
that have moved in this event.
This is, again,
useful if you're implementing a custom
gesture where you're just looking
at the fingers that are moving.
Or, for example,
something like drag and drop, where,
again,
you're just interested in moving fingers,
not necessarily the full set of
fingers that are down on the screen.
Okay, so that's pretty easy.
We can get the set of touches.
What is that?
Well,
this is just a standard JavaScript list,
so you can get the number of
touches that are down by getting
the length of that touch set.
You can just access this touches
array just like any other array,
so you can get the event.touches at i.
Important touch properties.
Like I said before,
a touch event -- touch events
work a lot like mouse events.
And in fact,
you can think of a touch as encapsulating
a lot of the same sorts of information
that a mouse event encapsulates.
So a touch has a target,
which is the node that
is receiving the event.
Additionally,
there's an identifier which you can use
to track the touch between successive
invocations of your touch handlers.
This is useful for something
like drag and drop.
There's Page X and Page Y.
This is the touch location
in page coordinates.
Just like mouse events, though,
you can get the coordinates
in other coordinate spaces,
client and screen.
So these are pretty much the important
touch properties that you're going
to be dealing with in general.
A couple of examples of how you
might want to use touch events.
If you wanted to do some
sort of a two-finger tap like
you see in Maps to zoom out,
that would be pretty easy to do.
You could just add a touch
start handler to your element,
look for two touches that
are down in that target,
Cancel the operation on touch move
because that would be more of like
a pinch gesture or some sort of a
rotate gesture or something like that.
You're just looking for two fingers
coming down and then releasing.
And then on touch end,
you would perform whatever action you
would perform on the two-finger tap.
It's pretty easy stuff.
There's the swipe gesture.
You see this a lot in
Apple native applications,
like in Mail, to quickly delete messages.
You could do something like this
pretty easily with touch events,
where you could have a touch
move handler that just looked for
motion mostly in the X direction.
Of course, canceling the swipe if there's
any diagonal or vertical motion
or if more fingers come down.
So these are a couple of the common
gestures that you see all over the
place on the iPhone that now you can
actually add to your web application,
which I think is pretty cool.
Now, there are a couple of gestures
that Apple is pretty fond of,
and we think that people are going to use
these in a lot of different applications.
We just keep coming back to
these over and over again.
There's the pinch gesture
to zoom in and out.
You see this all over
the place in the iPhone,
in Safari and Mapped and Photos.
There's also a rotate gesture,
which I don't think you
see anywhere on the iPhone,
right?
But it's pretty cool.
We keep coming back to it for
our demos for touch events.
So we'd like to standardize this
behavior and make sure that it feels
consistent in all of your applications.
So we're adding gesture events,
which are a simpler way to track touches,
specifically two or more touches that
are happening on the screen at once.
Now, with touch events,
you can get access to the set
of raw touches and perform
much more advanced processing.
For gesture events,
this is just for simplicity
and ease of implementation.
So when there are two more
touches on the screen and you're
registered to receive these events,
you'll get a gesture start event.
Followed by one or more gesture change
events for when your fingers move around,
or if additional fingers come
down on the screen or are removed.
And finally,
there's the gesture end event
for when the gesture is over.
So to register for these event handlers,
just like with touch events and
mouse events and other DOM events,
there's an onGestureStart,
onGestureChange,
and onGestureEnd HTML attributes
that you can use,
or you can do @EventListener.
By the way, touch and gesture events
both capture and bubble,
as you might expect if
you're a JavaScript pro.
Okay, so we've got an element that's
receiving gesture change events.
Well, what's in this event?
If you wanted to do something
with the rotation of the gesture,
you could look at event.rotation.
And this is the number of degrees
clockwise that the user has
rotated since the gesture began.
There's also the scale, event.scale,
and this is a value that is less than
one when the user is pinching in.
You might interpret that as
maybe a zoom out or something.
And it's greater than one
when the user is pinching out,
maybe sort of a zoom in operation.
It's interesting to note the
rotation and scale can both be set
or are both set in a gesture event,
so you can actually respond to both
gestures simultaneously if you wish.
Additionally, you can have a single
element that responds to both
touch and gesture events,
allowing for all sorts of
interesting multi-touch interactions.
I should mention prevent default.
This is the standard JavaScript mechanism
for controlling browser behaviors.
This is pretty important for touch
events and gesture events because
Safari implements default implementations
of touch events and gesture events.
For touch events,
that's how Safari scrolls
around on the page.
For gesture events,
that's how Safari zooms in and out.
So you can control this behavior,
override this behavior,
by calling preventDefault inside of
your touch or gesture event handlers.
So just a quick example for
a touch handler to prevent
scrolling inside of some element,
you would call
preventDefault on the event.
And in a gesture change handler,
you would call prevent default to
prevent zooming inside of Safari.
You can also turn off zooming using other
techniques like the meta viewport tag,
but this allows sort of selective
control over the zooming behavior
for certain elements or not.
So that was JavaScript touch
and gesture events,
just a couple simple additions to
HTML and JavaScript that you can use
to implement the same sorts of advanced
multi-touch interactions that are
possible in native iPhone applications,
which I think is pretty exciting.
So now I'd like to talk a
bit about CSS visual effects.
This is a new technology
in Safari on iPhone 2.0.
It's also on Safari 3.1 on the desktop.
And this will allow you to
perform hardware-accelerated,
really, really fast,
efficient transforms and
transitions and animations.
And this is really useful when
combined with touch and gesture events,
because you can provide
the sort of fluid,
responsive,
immersive feedback that you're
used to in an iPhone application.
So again, the big deal here is that
CSS visual effects on the
iPhone are hardware accelerated.
This means that when you affect
an element by transforming it
somewhere else on the page,
you're not affecting the page layout,
which is a really expensive operation
that can go through the whole DOM,
maybe execute some JavaScript, et cetera,
et cetera.
So this is a very efficient way to
affect changes on your web page.
So for best performance,
you should avoid changing-- these
are just the standard sort of
DHTML things that you're used to.
Don't change the top, left, and width,
and height to sort of
move and resize elements.
Instead,
there's a WebKit transform property.
I'll talk about this in a second.
And you can use this to affect
the sort of hardware-accelerated
transforms that I'm talking about.
Additionally, you should try to avoid
adding or removing elements
to or from the document.
This can also be pretty
expensive computationally and
cause relayout and repainting.
So instead, try to change the opacity of
elements that are already in there.
If you want to show
something on the page,
just fade it from opacity 0 to opacity 1.
A couple of examples of CSS transforms.
So we've got this little green box.
We're going to go ahead and
set different transforms on it.
Here we're going to set it
to translate 300 and 300,
so it'll move down and to the right.
Here we're going to
rotate it 152 degrees.
And let's go ahead and make it
twice as big as it is right now.
So these are just a few of
the different effects you can
achieve using CSS transforms.
There are actually a whole ton of them,
like skew effects.
You can do 3D perspective transforms,
or even apply arbitrary 4
by 4 matrices to elements.
But I wanted to highlight these
three because you might be able to
see how these map almost directly
to touch and gesture events.
You might imagine that the translate
for this element is controlled by
just dragging around on the page,
and the rotation and scale are
controlled by gesture events.
So just a code example of how
you might do something like that.
We've got an element that is
set to receive touch events.
And what we're going to do is take the
first touch out of the touch list and
just grab the X and Y out of there.
So we're going to figure out
where on the page the touch is.
And this is pretty simplistic,
but we're just going to move the
element to wherever the finger is
by setting the WebKit transform.
This is a much more efficient way
to do this kind of thing on the
iPhone than setting top and left.
I'm not going to get
too into detail here.
This is actually a very,
very deep topic with a lot to cover.
There's an entire session
that's devoted entirely to this.
It's later today in Presidio at 3:30.
It's called "Enhancing Your iPhone
Web Application with CSS Transforms and
Animations," which is quite a mouthful,
but this session is really awesome.
I highly encourage
everybody to check this out.
Now I'd like to invite Brad Moore on
stage again for a quick demo to show
us how to use touch and gesture events.
Thanks, Tim.
So we're actually going
to see code this time.
We're going to dive into an
example of drag and drop.
And for those of you who somehow
haven't seen drag and drop before,
here's a page in Safari on my Mac.
And as I click my mouse,
the image changes.
As I drag my mouse,
the image tracks the cursor.
And as I release my mouse,
the image changes again
and it stops tracking.
So this is a really common DHTML pattern.
And it's easy to implement in
JavaScript with mouse events.
So let's see the source for that now.
So we've got three mouse
handlers that correspond exactly
to the events I described.
On the mouse down event,
I'm performing an image swap here,
changing the source.
On the mouse move event,
I'm updating the left and top
properties of the style attribute
so that it tracks with the cursor.
And in the mouse up,
I'm again swapping the image.
Pretty simple, right?
Let's see how it works on the iPhone.
So here's the page, and when I tap on it,
I don't get any feedback.
And instead, I get this dialogue asking
me to save the image,
not what I was expecting.
And when I try to drag it,
the entire page pans
rather than the image.
And if you've ever developed a web
page that takes advantage of mouse
events and then viewed it on the iPhone,
you've found that you don't really
get interaction over time because
of the feature Tim spoke of,
that Safari uses all your events to
navigate about the page and scale it.
So we've got touch events now,
so let's fix that.
So I'm going to go back to the code.
And first things first,
let's go to the body and install
some handlers that are simply
going to prevent default.
Now, as Tim mentioned,
it's especially important to
prevent default when you're working
with events on the iPhone because
so often the default behavior
causes some very user-visible
and potentially jarring behavior if
it's not what you're looking for.
So with just this change,
let's see what the website
looks like on the phone.
So I'll reload.
And now,
as I press and hold on the image,
I don't get any dialogue.
And as I try to drag it,
the page doesn't move around.
So of course I'm not getting
the interactivity I do want,
but I'm no longer getting
the interactivity I don't.
So going back to the code,
let's go install the handlers that will
actually do the work we're interested in.
So I want to point out
that I'm installing the
handler on the image itself,
the handlers I care about.
And this is an important
distinction for mouse events.
With a mouse event,
it's going to deliver the event
to whichever element happens to be
beneath the mouse at any point in time.
With a touch event, that's not the case.
The recipient of the touch start is going
to continue receiving any subsequent
touch move and touch end events,
even as you move off the element.
So it's possible to track it if
you move your finger very quickly,
for instance.
And we think this is an
easier programming model,
especially when you have
multiple fingers on the screen.
So with that aside,
let's go define the handlers.
So right next to the
mouse down event handler,
I'm going to define touch start.
And you see the touch start
looks almost line for line
exactly like the mouse down does,
except that instead of pulling
the information directly
from the event itself,
I'm getting it from a
touch within the event.
Now, of course,
there could be multiple touches here,
and if I want to truly take
advantage of multi-touch,
I would reach in and grab
all those different touches.
But if I want to do that,
I'm going to have to do
it in a different way.
So I'm going to go ahead
and add a touch move.
And I want to point out something here.
Right now,
I'm using left and top on the touch move.
And that's going to work.
I'm going to update the CSS style.
And that's going to cause the
page to relay out and redraw.
And it will be pretty responsive.
But the frame rate won't be tremendous.
And iPhone users in particular have come
to expect really fluid and responsive
feedback to any interaction they have.
So rather than go this route,
I'm going to instead use the
WebKit transform property and
just do a simple translation,
as Tim discussed.
So with this change,
let me go back to the phone and
show you what it looks like.
And now I've got Fluid Drag and Drop.
And that's pretty exciting because this
was not possible before iPhone 2.0.
So thank you for that.
But you know,
we're not just trying to achieve
parity with mouse events.
We actually have a very
powerful programming model.
And if you'll bear with me,
I'm going to leave this as it is,
but leave the handlers as they are.
But I'm going to add a
second element to the page.
Oh, which doesn't appear to be here.
Well, demo gods are not with me.
But I cannot show you this now,
but it's very easy to have multiple
images dragging and dropping at once.
So that said,
that's not the only way you want to
interact with multiple touches on screen.
You can do independent actions
and have each event apply to a
separate element on the screen.
But something else you might want to
do is combine those touches together
to synthesize a single event,
a gesture as we call it.
And we certainly encourage you to
go out and discover and play with
your own and apply them to websites.
But Apple has already popularized some
system-wide gestures that we want you to
use for free to get consistent behavior.
So I have a toy little authentication
page I want to show you.
I'll just go to that now.
Okay.
So, this is a little dial.
It's an image separate
from the background.
And you can imagine that visually I want
to update this using CSS transform.
And just as an aside, this is something,
like,
you couldn't do without CSS transform.
So, CSS transforms are very powerful in
addition to giving you great performance.
But I'm most interested
right now on the interaction.
So, let me show you in the source
code how I can actually change
this page to make it respond.
And, of course,
it doesn't respond at the moment.
Here's the source.
And first things first,
I'm going to prevent default so I don't
get the interaction I don't want.
And then I'm going to go in
and add some gesture listeners.
And note here that I'm adding
event listener rather than doing
inline JavaScript via attributes.
Both methods are supported,
and these are fully compliant DOM events.
So going up to the meat
of the implementation,
I'm going to have gesture start,
gesture change, and gesture end.
And I'm doing a little bit of
bookkeeping in start and end so you get
a nice feeling of inertial scrolling.
But really, everything that makes this
interactive is in gesture change.
And I'm doing two things.
I'm preventing default for good measure,
and I'm updating the rotation.
And to update the rotation,
I simply query from the event,
and then I'm going to add a new rotation.
And then I'm going to add a new rotation.
And it gives me the angular
displacement in degrees.
And that's it.
That's all I have to do when
I get consistent behavior
with the rest of the system,
instead of tracking multiple touches
coming and going on the screen and
making complex inferences about
what angle I should be at now.
I can just use what
the system provides me.
It's not really more
expressive than touch events,
but it's a whole lot easier,
and we think you're going to like this.
So let me save this change
and go back to the demo.
Oh, yes, and reload.
And you may have seen in the
code that my combination is 10,
[Transcript missing]
Awesome.
Thank you, Brad.
So that was CSS Visual Effects.
Now I'd like to talk to you
about storing local user data
in your iPhone web application.
There are certain kinds of data
that you might use in your program
that rarely or never change.
A couple examples here.
There's static application resources,
things like images and
scripts and style sheets.
These may never change for the
whole lifetime of your web app,
but your users are constantly
downloading them over and over again.
User-created content and preferences,
even things as simple as, you know,
display sort orderings
in a list or whatever,
there are certain pieces of
information that maybe you want
quicker access to than having
to go fetch them from a network.
[Transcript missing]
When you open it and start scrolling
around and zooming to different places,
it's actually caching
all those tiles to disk,
so the next time you open Maps and
start scrolling around in the same area,
which is pretty convenient because you
probably don't move around that much,
those tiles are already
going to be cached,
and so the user experience is
improved because you don't have
to go redownload everything.
And a lot of our apps do this.
The YouTube app does something
similar for video data and thumbnails.
So you can imagine using
this sort of technique in
your web application as well.
In general,
we'd kind of like to get the ball rolling
and get you guys to start thinking about
pre-caching data as much as you can for
faster access or eventually offline use.
You should always strive to eliminate
unnecessary network traffic.
This is especially important
in a high-latency environment
like Edge or even 3G.
So to solve this problem,
we're introducing named
databases for your site.
You get five megabytes
maximum per database.
And this is a database that you
open and control through JavaScript.
But behind the scenes,
it's actually SQLite.
This is the same database that we use in
a lot of Apple's own iPhone applications.
For example, the Contacts database,
that's all just SQLite.
Again, there's YouTube and Maps that
store everything in SQLite.
A whole bunch of applications
in the iPhone are actually using
this underlying technology.
So you know it's screaming
fast and it works great.
It's built on asynchronous transactions,
so while you're running a
database query in your JavaScript,
it's not going to interfere
with the rest of your web
application until it's complete.
I just want to show you a quick example
of how you can use this feature.
So to open a database, you'd start first,
if you wanted to be a good web citizen,
by checking for the existence
of the database feature itself,
which you can do by looking
for window.opendatabase.
And this is the function that you call
to open a database for your website.
You give it a name, a version,
a display name, and an estimated size.
You don't need to worry too much
about making the name unique,
because your database is
already unique to your domain.
This will return null upon failure,
which you can do whatever you want.
Probably shouldn't alert like that,
it's a bad idea.
So once you've opened your database,
the first thing you're going to
want to do is create a schema.
This involves creating
tables and populating your
database with default objects.
So we're going to do that by starting
a transaction in our database.
You just call database.transaction,
and you pass in a function that will
get called to run your transaction.
And here's that function now.
You see that it just calls
execute SQL on the transaction.
And the SQL that you're executing
here just creates a table called
Things with a column name,
so specific.
The second argument
here is an empty array.
You can actually pass in arguments
to your SQL string if you want.
You can have wild cards in there.
And the third argument
is populate database,
a function that I define.
which,
upon successful creation of the table,
will go and insert an
object into the table.
In this case, we're putting an iPhone
3G into the Things table.
Okay,
so you've got your table all set up,
got your schema in place.
To perform a query, again,
this is just a transaction,
so inside of your transaction,
you're going to execute some SQL.
And in this case,
we're going to select the name of
everything in the things table.
And when that's done,
it's going to call a
function called show things.
The show things function,
it's pretty convenient, actually,
in the results of a database
query in JavaScript,
because all you have to
do is get results.rows,
and these are the rows
returned from the query,
and then you can just look up properties
inside the objects that are bound
directly to the database column.
So in this case, I just alert the name of
everything in the database.
It's pretty simple to use.
I'm not going to get too into detail
on this because this is actually
part of the HTML5 specification,
which Apple contributes to.
The database feature is actually
available in both iPhone 2.0 as
well as Safari 3.1 on the desktop.
So this is an open standard.
If you want to know more
about the database feature,
there's full documentation
and examples and everything,
you should check out the W3 site,
the HTML5 Working Group,
where you can read about local databases
as well as the other things in HTML5.
There's also an entire session
here at WWDC tomorrow at 2:00 PM.
So if you're interested
in how this works,
you should definitely
check out this session.
So that was storing local user data.
Now I'd like to talk a little bit
about some tips and tricks that you
can use to really add some shine and
polish to your iPhone web application.
So this is the link highlight.
I'm sure you're all
familiar with this thing.
You can actually customize
the color of this.
It doesn't have to be gray.
You can make it pink
or orange or whatever.
You're more likely to
just want to turn it off,
which you can do by setting the color
to something that's transparent,
just have an alpha value of zero.
There's the callout bubble that
appears when you hold down on some
clickable element on the page.
Again, this is useful for links and such,
but not so much for buttons
and other UI elements.
So you might want to turn this
off by setting the CSS property
WebKitTouchCallout to None or
Default to turn it back on.
Detecting orientation changes.
If you have a sort of advanced
iPhone application that maybe
has two different views,
depending on whether you're
in portrait or landscape mode,
you can use the orientation change
event to detect the changes in the
user interface orientation of Safari.
So you register for onOrientationChange,
passing in your handler function,
and then you can get the
current orientation by
looking at window.orientation.
The values there are zero
for standard portrait mode,
90 and -90 for the landscape modes.
Web Clip.
This is something that I'm sure
everybody in this room knows about,
but I just wanted to stress this.
I think it's pretty important.
Any page or web app from within Safari on
the iPhone can actually be added to the
home screen as a web clip so that users
can access them just like applications.
This is really cool.
By default, the icon for your web clip
will just be a screenshot of
your site scaled down to fit.
And if you kind of squint,
you can sort of make out
what those sites are.
But, you know,
users really like when you take
the extra effort to make shiny,
distinctive,
simple icons so they can really
quickly recognize which site is which.
So please, if you are making a web app
or a web page for the iPhone,
specify a custom icon for it,
which is pretty easy to do.
This works a lot like fav icons.
You just put a link tag in your document.
Here we're specifying the
Apple Touch icon and pointing it
at a ping file on the web server.
Now, this will specify the icon
just for that one document.
If you want to have an icon that
is applied across your entire site,
which Apple.com and
various other sites do,
you can install appletouchicon.ping
just at the root of your web server,
and Safari will automatically look
there whenever you're adding a web clip.
Your icon should be 57
pixels by 57 pixels.
If it's any other size,
then Safari will scale and crop it
to fit inside the standard icon size.
Your icon will automatically be rounded
and have the glass applied to it,
so there's no need to do that.
However,
if you have a really good icon designer,
someone who's really picky
and wants to specify exactly,
you know, how shiny it should be,
you can specify a pre-composed icon,
which is the full real deal.
No rounding or no shiny
stuff will be applied.
We'll just take your icon as is
and display it on the home screen.
So, clapping icon designer over there,
apparently.
So, you can do that by doing exactly the
same thing but tacking -precomposed
to the end of Apple Touch Icon.
The auto-correction feature on
the iPhone is really awesome.
It's really powerful.
It works in multiple different languages,
et cetera, et cetera.
But your web application may have
its own sort of completion UI,
and you wouldn't really want the iPhone's
built-in auto-completion to sort of
be happening at the same time as that.
So if you want to turn that off,
you can use the auto-correct
attribute on the input element.
Google's little completion thing.
UI WebView.
So I've been sort of talking about all of
this in the context of web applications,
but WebKit is actually useful
in a native application as well.
So you can make it in code,
make a UI WebView in code,
look at UIWebView.h.
But we've also got
interface builder support,
so you can just drag out a WebView.
Just like on the desktop,
loading a document into a
UI WebView is really easy.
You just make an NSURL,
you wrap it in a URL request,
and then you give that to the
WebView through load request.
Now, you can imagine doing something
kind of boring and simple with this,
some sort of legal, please, blah, blah,
blah,
I agree to sell my soul sort of thing.
But you could do something
more interesting with it.
You could have some sort of like a
chat client and use it as a display
engine for the speech bubbles if
you want to do something like that.
There are a multitude of
different uses for WebKit inside
of a native application.
If you're going to do anything
sort of complicated like this,
you might want some sort of
communication between your web
content and the native side.
So you can control the web content
inside of a UI web view through String
by evaluating JavaScript from String.
And so this will allow you to
call functions that you've defined
inside your custom web content to
append things to the document or
just change whatever's in the page.
Communication the other way,
we don't have WebScript object yet,
but you can achieve some
level of JavaScript to native
communication through the
UI WebView delegate mechanism.
An example of how you can
do something like this.
Here we've got a WebView should start
load with request navigation type method,
and this is defined on the
delegate of my WebView.
This is such a hack,
but I think it's kind of cool.
So here we're looking at the URL scheme,
and we're looking for a
string that we've defined,
in this case, myapp.
And if the rest of the URL is
some command that we recognize,
like do something,
we'll go ahead and do something.
And then from the JavaScript side,
to invoke this command,
all you have to do is
just navigate there.
You notice in the Objective-C side,
we return "no" to actually
prevent navigation of that
non-existent bogus URL.
So those are some tips and tricks
that you can use to really add
some shine and polish to your app.
I'd like to invite Brad Moore on stage
one final time to show you how you can
bring it all together and really take
advantage of these tips and tricks.
Thank you, Tim.
So we just covered a
huge array of things,
and rather than try to incorporate every
single item from that bag of tricks
into a toy website within UI WebView,
I want to ground this with an example
that's actually out on the web today.
A lot of you are probably
familiar with IUI.
It's a framework that came out within
about a month of the iPhone's launch.
And it tries to, with a little bit of
clever CSS and JavaScript,
make it very easy for web apps
to have the same look and,
to a certain extent,
feel of native applications.
So here we have an example
of IUI as applied to Digg.
And indeed, it does look like a native
navigation-based app.
I can scroll through, and it looks great.
But as soon as I begin
interacting with this,
I begin to notice some discrepancies.
So notice that when I tap on something,
the blue highlight isn't responsive.
It actually comes after my
finger is already lifted.
And when I tap on buttons,
I get an odd highlight.
In fact, if I tap and hold,
I get a highlight and a callout
that are very jarring and
sort of make it impossible
for me to suspend my disbelief.
It no longer feels like
a native application.
The IUI developer should be commended.
I mean,
they used every trick at their disposal
to make this look like a native app.
But before today,
making this feel like a native app
was just really an impossible task.
But now that we have all these
tricks Tim just discussed,
we can improve this greatly
with just a few simple changes.
So let me go over to the
code and do that now.
So here we have IUI's CSS page.
And I should, as an aside,
we could prevent the default behavior
like the callout and the tap highlight,
as mentioned before,
just by preventing default
on the touch event.
But with a framework like IUI,
there is some behavior you do want,
like the scrolling.
So preventing default
is a little heavyweight,
and we can do something
more precise if we use CSS.
So here I have my very
promiscuous selector.
Please don't do this in actual code.
But for the purposes of the demo,
it's a lot easier to apply to everything.
So you see that I'm setting the web
touch callout to none and the webkit
tap highlight color to a clear color,
which effectively disables it.
And there's no performance
cost having a clear color.
So if I set these two things,
I'm going to remove some of the
artifacts I don't want to see.
So, you know, two lines of code, really.
Let me show you what
the demo looks like now.
And of course, I can still scroll,
but now when I press and hold,
I don't get any jarring
highlight or callout.
And I think that's really wonderful,
and it took almost nothing to achieve.
We also probably want the blue highlight
and other elements to be more responsive.
And there are a lot of
ways to attack this.
Probably the correct thing to do
is rewrite the JavaScript handlers
to use touch events directly,
since it is designed for the iPhone.
But another thing we could do is
simply install a no-op touch handler,
and then all of a sudden the cool and
active pseudo class is going to be
reinterpreted by Safari on the iPhone to
last for the duration of the touch down.
And that's something else we can try.
But what I'm going to do for this
demo is go into the code and...
Go to the JavaScript,
and I'm going to add a touch
start listener that does
a tiny bit of the code,
a tiny bit of the work that
the existing click handlers do,
but it's just going to do
it earlier in the process.
So if I make this small change and
then go back to IUI and reload,
You'll see that all of a sudden I'm
getting that responsive feedback that
just makes this feel like a native app.
Now, we've got touch events now,
and you can imagine all sorts of cool
features you would add to make this
even more like a native app or better.
We could add reordering.
You name it, we could add it.
But you see how little code it took to
make it suddenly feel so much better.
And I think that's a message
you should really take home.
You don't have to have a visually
complex or an interactively complex
to benefit really greatly from
incorporating these techniques.
So hopefully you'll take these
techniques home and make your web
apps feel as good as they look.
And I think Tim has more to cover.
Thank you, Brad.
So in summary,
we think that web apps already look good.
You guys have done an awesome job of
making sure that your web apps look
like they're at home on the iPhone.
But now that your apps can feel good,
too, you can use multi-touch
interaction in the same way
that a native application can.
You can use touch events combined
with CSS visual effects for native
performance and really fluid,
immersive, responsive user interfaces.
You can cache data
locally for faster access.
This is always going to improve the
user experience of your application.
You should do this wherever possible.
In general, I hope after this talk,
you're more generally
equipped to fine-tune your web
application for the iPhone.
If you want more information about
anything that we've talked about today,
you can ask Mark Malone or Vicki Murley,
our
Safari Internet Technologies evangelists.
We've also got an entire section on
developer.apple.com that's devoted
to web application development.
You can look on
developer.apple.com/webapps.
A few sessions I wanted to mention.
I mentioned a few during the slides,
but here they are again.
Enhancing your iPhone web application
with CSS transforms and animations.
You'll learn how to do all
sorts of really amazing 2D and
three-dimensional effects and
animations in Safari on the iPhone.
using Dashcode to create
and debug iPhone web apps.
I didn't mention Dashcode
in this talk at all,
but they've made a bunch of great
enhancements for Safari on iPhone 2.0
to help you create and debug web apps.
There's also a hands-on session tomorrow
where you get to build an iPhone
application like what you saw today.
Hands-on.
There's a lab coming up today at 2:00.
I'll be there, Brad will be there,
a bunch of my team will be there.
So if you have any questions about
iPhone web application development,
please don't hesitate to
come down and ask questions.